PETER JONES
Special to Globe and Mail Update
September 16, 2008 at 12:06 AM EDT

The nomination of Alaska Governor Sarah Palin as John McCain's running mate has injected 
energy into the Republican campaign and guaranteed a significant historical dimension to the 
race for the White House - in January, the United States will swear in either its first black 
president or its first female vice-president, an undeniably important milestone in the 
country's political and social history.

Still nagging, however, is the question of whether Ms. Palin is ready to be vice-president. 
It is a valid question, since she would be serving with the oldest first-term president ever 
elected. But those who raise the issue of her readiness have to be careful. In the extremely 
sensitive world of gender and politics, there is a fine line between questioning one 
particular woman's qualifications to be so close to the presidency, and the appearance of 
questioning whether any woman can occupy this post. As inoculation, Ms. Palin and her 
handlers have already developed a strong theme of sexism.

One element of this carefully developed Republican argument is that Ms. Palin's relative lack 
of political experience is not unique to her candidacy. As she said in her widely watched 
convention speech: "Long ago, a young farmer and a haberdasher from Missouri, he followed an 
unlikely path to the vice-presidency."

The comparison to Harry Truman suits the Republicans perfectly. Here was a man who, in the 
popular telling, came from nowhere to occupy the presidency when his boss died. He went on to 
make some of the most consequential decisions of the 20th century, and most historians 
believe he made them well. Mr. Truman is also a beloved figure in American political history 
for his straight talk, his seeming small-town approach to big issues and his apparent lack of 
extensive political background before he became president.

Just how apt is the Palin-Truman comparison? Ms. Palin served on the council of Wasilla, 
Alaska, from 1992 to 1996, as its mayor from 1996 to 2002. She ran, unsuccessfully, for the 
post of lieutenant governor in 2002 and then served as ethics commissioner of the Alaska Oil 
and Gas Conservation Commission for two years before being elected governor in late 2006.

This is credible experience for an emerging politician in her mid-40s, if hardly earth-
shattering. Of course, there are other dimensions of experience. Ms. Palin has five children. 
Even in the most liberal of households (which we may presume that the Palin residence is 
not), the burden of child-rearing falls unequally on women. If there are gaps in her political CV, this should not be held against her.

But the Truman comparison, which is a key to the Republican strategy for dealing with Ms. 
Palin's rather short political history, is a poor one. Mr. Truman did not, in fact, come out 
of nowhere to succeed Franklin Roosevelt, and he certainly had much more political experience 
when he stood for the vice-presidency than Ms. Palin has today. Contrary to what Ms. Palin 
said in her convention speech, Mr. Truman's preparation for the vice-presidency was far from 
"unlikely" - it was classic and thorough.

Mr. Truman saw combat in the First World War as an artillery officer. He started a number of 
small businesses before finding his calling as a local politician in Missouri and attracting 
the patronage of the political machine of the time. Most importantly, he then served for 10 
years in the U.S. Senate before being selected by the Democratic Party to run with Roosevelt 
in the 1944. During his time in the Senate, Mr. Truman worked his way up the political ladder 
in the classic way, playing an increasingly active role on progressively more important 
committees. Most notably, he played a leading role on a powerful wartime committee that 
oversaw military procurement, rooting out waste and corruption in billions of dollars worth 
of contracts.

In short, it's difficult to compare Ms. Palin's experience to that of Mr. Truman at the point 
he sought the vice-presidency. This doesn't mean the Alaska governor wouldn't make a good 
vice-president - or even president, should it come to that. It does mean we should not accept 
spurious historical comparisons at face value, particularly those offered to prevent a real 
examination of Ms. Palin's qualifications to be vice-president. Just as it would be wrong for 
her to be denied office by voters simply because she is a woman, so too would it be wrong for 
her candidacy to be subjected to any less scrutiny than a comparably experienced man. And the 
inescapable conclusion is that she is no Harry Truman - at least not yet.

Of course, there is another dimension to Ms. Palin's selection that needs to be considered: 
how her political experience compares to that of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama 
himself. Although some would argue that Mr. Obama's experience is greater than Ms. Palin's, 
this is debatable. Neither is a traditionally prepared candidate, but this is part of their 
appeal in a year when U.S. voters seem eager for change.

Peter Jones is associate professor in the Graduate School of Public and International Affairs
 at the University of Ottawa. comparably experienced man. And the 
inescapable conclusion is that she is no Harry Truman - at least not yet.

Of course, there is another dimension to Ms. Palin's selection that needs to be considered: 
how her political experience compares to that of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama 
himself. Although some would argue that Mr. Obama's experience is greater than Ms. Palin's, 
this is debatable. Neither is a traditionally prepared candidate, but this is part of their 
appeal in a year when U.S. voters seem eager for change.

Peter Jones is associate professor in the Graduate School of Public and International Affairs
 at the University of Ottawa.
